Installation and Testing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

    **You should remove NURBS-Python v2.x and v3.x before installing any version of v4.x.**
    Uninstalling packages via pip is as easy as executing ``pip uninstall NURBS-Python``.
    However, installation via ``setup.py`` requires manual removal of the packages from Python's ``site-packages``
    directory. Directories to delete: *nurbs* and/or *geomdl*.

**Installation via pip or conda is the recommended method for all users.**
Manual method is only recommended for advanced users. Please note that if you have used any of these methods to install
NURBS-Python, please use the same method to upgrade to the latest version.

Install via Pip
===============

The easiest method to install/upgrade NURBS-Python is using `pip <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/>`_. The following
commands will download and install NURBS-Python from `Python Package Index <https://pypi.org/project/geomdl>`_.

``pip install geomdl``

Upgrading to the latest version:

``pip install geomdl --upgrade``

Install via Conda
=================

NURBS-Python can also be installed/upgraded via `conda <https://conda.io/>`_ package manager from the
`Anaconda Cloud <https://anaconda.org/orbingol/geomdl>`_ repository.

To install:

``conda install -c orbingol geomdl``

To upgrade:

``conda upgrade -c orbingol geomdl``

If you are experiencing problems with this method, you can try to upgrade ``conda`` package itself before
installing the NURBS-Python library.

Manual Install
==============

The initial step of the manual install is cloning the repository via ``git`` or downloading the ZIP archive from the
`repository page <https://github.com/orbingol/NURBS-Python>`_ on GitHub. The package includes a *setup.py* script
which will take care of the installation and automatically copy/link the required files to your Python distribution's
*site-packages* directory.

The following command will copy NURBS-Python package to your Python distribution's *site-packages* directory:

``python setup.py install``

To upgrade, please pull the latest commits from the repository via ``git pull --rebase`` and then execute the above
installation command.

If you don't prefer copying for some reason (e.g. extension development, bug fixing and/or testing), you may run the
following from the command line to generate a link to the directory where you cloned NURBS-Python package inside your
Python distribution's *site-packages* directory:

``python setup.py develop``

Since this command only generates a link to the library directory, pulling the latest commits from the repository
would be enough to update the library to the latest version.

Checking Installation
=====================

If you would like to check if you have installed the package correctly, you may try to print ``geomdl.__version__``
variable after import. The following example illustrates installation check on a Windows PowerShell instance::

    Windows PowerShell
    Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

    PS C:\> python
    Python 3.6.2 (v3.6.2:5fd33b5, Jul  8 2017, 04:57:36) [MSC v.1900 64 bit (AMD64)] on win32
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    >>> import geomdl
    >>> geomdl.__version__
    '4.0.2'
    >>>

Testing
=======

The package includes ``tests/`` directory which contains all the automated testing scripts.
These scripts require `pytest <https://pytest.readthedocs.io/en/latest>`_ installed on your Python distribution.
After installing the required packages, you may execute the following from your favorite IDE or from the command line:

``pytest`` or ``py.test``

pytest will automatically find the tests under ``tests/`` directory, execute them and show the results.

Compile with Cython
===================

**This is an advanced and an optional feature. It is not available on pip and conda packages.**

The :doc:`Core Library <modules>` of NURBS-Python can be compiled using the following command:

``python setup.py build_ext --use-cython --inplace``

This command will copy .py files into a temporary directory, generate .c files (i.e. cythonize) and finally compile the
.c files into binary Python modules.

The following command can be used to directly compile the generated .c files skipping the copy and the cythonization
steps:

``python setup.py build_ext --use-source --inplace``

You may prefer to skip the copy and the cythonization steps if the compilation fails for some reason. To update the
compiled module with the latest changes, you have to re-cythonize and compile the code.

After the successful execution of the command, ``geomdl_core`` directory containing the binary versions of the
NURBS-Python Core Library will be generated. The compiled version will not include the visualization module or other
submodules, however visualization module can be used to plot the shapes generated by the compiled version of
NURBS-Python.

Before executing the command, please make sure that you have `Cython <https://cython.org/>`_ module and a valid compiler
installed for your operating system.
